Extremal Choices
======================

In previous chapters, we saw how problems can be easily proven by choosing an object that possesses the property of being the largest or smallest. For example, the longest path is a common extremal choice whose properties aid us in solving problems. In this section, we become acquainted with other extremal choices.

Every extremal choice has properties that can help us solve problems. Below, we merely list these properties, and the proofs of these properties (which are generally simple) are left to the reader.

Shortest Path Between Two Vertices
----------------------------

Properties
~~~~~~
- No vertex outside this path has an edge to two vertices on this path that are 3 edges or more apart.
- As a result of the above statement, every vertex from outside has an edge to at most 3 vertices inside this path.
- The induced subgraph of the vertices of this path is the path itself, and there are no other edges within it.

Longest Path in a Graph
---------------------

Properties
~~~~~~
- All vertices adjacent to the start and end vertices of this path are within this path.
- No two consecutive vertices have a common neighbor outside the path.
- If the start and end of this path are connected, this path contains all vertices of its component.

Smallest Cycle
---------------

Properties
~~~~~~
- The induced subgraph of the vertices of this cycle is the cycle itself, and there are no other edges within it.
- If the length of this cycle is greater than 4, every vertex from outside this cycle has an edge to at most one vertex of this cycle.

Smallest Odd Cycle
---------------

Properties
~~~~~~
- The induced subgraph of the vertices of this cycle is the cycle itself, and there are no other edges within it.
- If the length of this cycle is greater than three, every vertex from outside this cycle has an edge to at most two vertices of this cycle.

Lowest Leaf in a Rooted Tree
---------------------------------
Refers to a leaf in the tree that has the greatest height.

Properties
~~~~~~
- All children of the parent of this leaf are leaves.