Here's the translation of the reStructuredText chunk from Persian to English, preserving the original formatting:

```rst
Contraction
===========

Contraction of a cycle is an operation in graph theory where we consider a cycle and replace its vertices with a single vertex. For every vertex outside the cycle that was adjacent to any of the cycle's vertices, we add an edge between this vertex and the new vertex.

Suitable Choice for Contraction
------------------------------

The cycle we intend to contract should preferably not have any chords (internal edges) and the graph should remain simple after its contraction. For instance, triangles in a kite-free graph, or cycles defining the girth of a graph (if the graph has more than four vertices), possess these properties and are thus suitable candidates for contraction.

An Example
---------
Consider a simple graph where its cycles do not share edges and it has
:math:`2n+1`
vertices. What is the maximum number of edges in this graph?

Answer
:math:`3n`
is the answer.

Example
~~~~~~
For an example with this number of edges, you can place a central vertex in the graph, and for `n` distinct pairs of the remaining vertices, construct a triangle that includes this central vertex.

Proof of Maximality
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Here, we prove by induction that for any graph whose cycles do not share edges,
:math:`2m \le 3n-1`
holds.
Consider the smallest counterexample to this theorem. This graph cannot be acyclic, because in that case, the number of its edges would be less than its vertices, meaning the theorem would hold for it. It is clear that the cycles in this graph cannot have chords (i.e., edges within them), because in that case, two cycles sharing an edge would be created. Furthermore, a vertex cannot be adjacent to two vertices of the same cycle. Therefore, we contract one of the cycles in this graph. The graph remains simple, and it can be shown that its cycles still do not share edges. (Prove this statement to gain intuition about contraction.) And since we considered the smallest counterexample, the theorem holds for the new graph. If we contracted a cycle of length k, k edges and
:math:`k-1`
vertices are removed from the graph. Thus we have:

.. math:: 2(m - k) \le 3(n - k + 1) - 1

And we already knew that:

.. math:: 2m > 3n - 1

From these two statements, we deduce that:

.. math:: 2k < 3(k + 1)

This means the cycle we removed had fewer than 3 vertices, which is not possible in simple graphs. From this, we reach a contradiction. With a little more care, it can be seen that equality holds only when k is exactly 3, which means all cycles in the graph must be triangles (as our example satisfied this condition).
