Coloring
========
Vertex Coloring
---------------
In vertex coloring, each vertex is assigned a color such that no two adjacent vertices have the same color.

K-colorable
~~~~~~~~~~~
If we can color the vertices of a graph using at most k colors, we call that graph k-colorable.

Proper K-coloring
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If k colors are used in coloring the vertices (for each color z, there exists a vertex that is colored z), the coloring performed is called a proper k-coloring.

Chromatic Number
~~~~~~~~~
A graph that is k-colorable but not (k - 1)-colorable is said to be k-chromatic.
k is called the chromatic number of the graph, denoted as χ(G) = k.
In fact, the chromatic number of a graph represents the minimum number of colors required to color the vertices of the graph.

Edge Coloring
---------------
If the edges of a graph can be colored with k colors, we say that graph is k-edge-colorable.

Chromatic Index
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If a graph is k-edge-colorable but not (k - 1)-edge-colorable, we say this graph is k-edge-chromatic.
Here, k is considered the chromatic index of the graph, and it is denoted as χ′(G) = k.

Information about Coloring
---------------------------
Maps are colored in such a way that no two adjacent countries have the same color.
However, the question was what is the minimum number of colors required for coloring, and Francis Guthrie was the first to conjecture that any map could be colored with 4 colors. In 1976, Guthrie's conjecture was proven with the help of computers and became a theorem.