Independent Set and Clique
====================

In the first chapter, we became familiar with independent sets and cliques, as well as the independence and clique numbers. We also learned that

.. math::
  \alpha(G) = \omega(\overline{G})

In this chapter, we will learn more about the properties of these two concepts.

Turan's Theorem
------------
This theorem provides a bound on the number of edges of a graph, in terms of its clique number. If we consider
:math:`e`
as the number of edges of the graph and
:math:`n`
as the number of its vertices, the theorem states that:

.. math::
  e \le \frac{n^2(\omega - 1)}{2 \omega}

And equality holds only for a complete
:math:`\omega`-partite graph.

Proof
~~~~~~~
We define
:math:`x \sim y`
to mean that vertices
:math:`x`
and
:math:`y`
are not adjacent. In a graph with the maximum possible number of edges, if
:math:`x \sim y`
and
:math:`y \sim z`
then we prove that
:math:`x \sim z`. We proceed by contradiction. Suppose this is not the case, then one of the following two situations exists:

*   The degree of vertex
    :math:`y`
    is greater than or equal to the degrees of the other two vertices. In this case, remove those two vertices and
    add two copies of vertex
    :math:`y`. It is clear that this graph will not have a larger clique, and with a little calculation,
    you can find that its number of edges is strictly greater.
*   The degree of one of the vertices
    :math:`x`
    or
    :math:`z`
    is greater than the degree of vertex
    :math:`y`. In this case, remove vertex
    :math:`y`
    and add a copy of the vertex with the higher degree. This graph will not have a larger clique,
    but its number of edges is strictly greater.

From the above proposition, it follows that a graph with a maximum clique size of
:math:`\omega`
that has the maximum number of edges must be a complete multipartite graph. And among these graphs, the one with the most edges is precisely an
:math:`\omega`-partite graph where the vertices are equally distributed among the parts (i.e., the difference in part sizes is no more than 1), which you can prove by moving vertices from larger parts to smaller parts and observing the increase in the number of edges.

Other Forms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The case where the clique size is considered to be less than or equal to 2 is known as Mantel's Theorem, which states that in any graph that does not contain a triangle, we have

.. math::
  e \le \frac{n^2}{4}

Also, this theorem can be stated for the independence number. According to Turan's theorem, we have:
  
.. math::
  e(G) \le \frac{n^2(\omega(G) - 1)}{2 \omega(G)}

.. math::
  \binom{n}{2} - e(G) \ge \binom{n}{2} - \frac{n^2(\omega(G) - 1)}{2 \omega(G)}

.. math::
  e(\overline{G}) \ge \binom{n}{2} - \frac{n^2(\alpha(\overline{G}) - 1)}{2 \alpha(\overline{G})}

And since every graph has a complement, for all graphs we have:

.. math::
  e \ge \binom{n}{2} - \frac{n^2(\alpha - 1)}{2 \alpha}

Connection to Ramsey Numbers
------------------------
According to the definition of Ramsey numbers, which we became familiar with in previous sections, if
:math:`R(s,t)=n`
then every graph with
:math:`n`
vertices has either an independent set of size
:math:`s`
or a clique of size
:math:`t`. From the previous part, we recall that
:math:`R(a,b) \le \binom{a+b}{b}`
and therefore

.. math::
  R(n,n) \le \binom{2n}{n} \le 4^n

.. math::
  max(\alpha, \omega) \ge log_4(n)

Which is an interesting bound in itself, especially when we know that for every
:math:`n`,
there exists a graph such that
:math:`max(\alpha, \omega) = \theta(lg(n))`.
