برگه تقلب (Cheat sheet)
==========================

The goal of this book for learning graph theory is not to memorize definitions. Whenever you forget a definition, you can
refer to this page, and this is absolutely not cheating (the page title is merely an idiom).

Note that this page is not intended for teaching, and the content is summarized in such a way that only someone
who has previously been familiar with it can recall it. For learning, use the main lessons.

Numbers
-------
- Independence number or largest independent set (Alpha :math:`\alpha` ):
  The maximum number of vertices in a graph that have no edges between them.
- Maximum matching (Alpha prime :math:`\alpha^{\prime}` ):
  The maximum number of edges in a graph with distinct vertices.
- Minimum vertex cover (Beta :math:`\beta` ):
  The minimum number of vertices in a graph such that every edge has at least one endpoint in these vertices.
- Minimum edge cover (Beta prime :math:`\beta^{\prime}` ):
  The minimum number of edges in a graph such that every vertex is an endpoint of at least one of these edges.
- Chromatic number (Chi :math:`\chi` ):
  The minimum number of colors with which the vertices of a graph can be colored such that there are no
  edges between any two vertices of the same color.
- Chromatic index (Chi prime :math:`\chi^{\prime}` ):
  The minimum number of colors with which the edges of a graph can be colored such that
  no two edges of the same color share a common endpoint.
- Connectivity number (Kappa :math:`\kappa`)
  The minimum number of vertices whose removal disconnects the graph.
- Edge connectivity number (Kappa prime :math:`\kappa^{\prime}`)
  The minimum number of edges whose removal disconnects the graph.
- Clique number (Omega :math:`\omega` ):
  The maximum number of vertices in a graph that are pairwise connected by edges.
- Minimum degree (Delta small :math:`\delta` ):
  The number of edges of the vertex with the fewest edges.
- Maximum degree (Delta large :math:`\Delta` ):
  The number of edges of the vertex with the most edges.