
k-connected Graph
=================
The first question that made this section meaningful was: what is the minimum number of vertices that need to be removed from a graph to make it disconnected?

k-connected Graph
-----------------

A graph is called k-connected if it has more than k vertices, and if fewer than k vertices are removed from the graph, the graph remains connected. Also, k is the largest possible such value, and it is denoted by :math:`\kappa (G)`.
Another definition exists for this concept, which states: "the minimum number of vertices whose removal from the graph makes the graph disconnected." However, this definition has a problem, which concerns complete graphs. If you consider, you can never disconnect complete graphs by removing any number of their vertices; at most, you can reduce them to a single isolated vertex. With this in mind, we can correct the second definition with a slight modification.
Therefore, we can say:
- The minimum number of vertices whose removal from the graph makes the graph disconnected or reduces it to a single vertex.
:math:`\kappa (u,v)` is defined as the minimum number of vertices whose removal disconnects the path between u and v (or, in other words, places them in two separate components).

k-edge-connected Graph
----------------------
It is defined similarly to the k-connected graph, except this definition applies to edges instead of vertices.
Therefore, a k-edge-connected graph is a graph where the minimum number of edges that must be removed to make it disconnected or reduce it to a single vertex is k, and it is denoted by :math:`\kappa^{\prime}(G)`. Note that this value can also be zero. If it is connected and the graph has a bridge edge, its value becomes one.
Also, :math:`\kappa^{\prime}(u,v)` is defined as the minimum number of edges whose removal disconnects the path between u and v, placing them in two separate components.

Menger's Theorem
----------------
Several paths between vertices u and v are called disjoint if these paths share no common vertices other than u and v. Now, it can be stated that the minimum number of vertices whose removal disconnects the path between two vertices u and v is equal to the maximum number of disjoint paths between these two vertices.

The same theorem also applies to edges, stating that the minimum number of edges whose removal disconnects the path between two vertices is equal to the maximum number of edge-disjoint paths between these two vertices.